Readme and license (#7)
stjude/XenoCP: README.md

# XenoCP

XenoCP is a tool for cleansing mouse reads in xenograft BAMs.

> XenoCP can be easily incorporated into any workflow as it takes a BAM file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XenoCP can be easily incorporated into any workflow, as it takes a BAM file
```

> as input and efficiently cleans up the mouse contamination and gives a clean

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as input and efficiently cleans up the mouse contamination. The output is a clean
```

> human BAM output that could be used for downstream genomic analysis. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
human BAM file that could be used for downstream genomic analysis. 
```

## Getting started

XenoCP can be run in the cloud on DNAnexus at

> https://platform.dnanexus.com/app/stjude_xenocp

Reviewer 2: Is there a risk people will have permissions issues with this?  I seem to remember something about the app being available to people with a St. Jude Cloud users group of some sort that they got automatically after logging into St. Jude Cloud Platform, or something along those lines.

Author: @jsunny23 - Can you comment on this?

The dxapp config has the following set of users. 
`  "authorizedUsers": [
      "user-lding",
      "user-appdpdnanexus_stjude.org",
      "user-appdddnanexus_stjude.org",
      "org-stjude_cloud_app_runners",
      "org-stjude_cloud"
  ],`

Reviewer 3: Yes, when a user logs into St. Jude Cloud Platform, they're added to `org-stjude_cloud_app_runners`. So all St. Jude Cloud users should be able to see it under the tools page (I can see the app) and be vendable from platform. 

Note: DNAnexus only allow developers or authorized users to run apps. So if you want this to be truly public, that may require talking to DNAnexus.

Reviewer 4: I think you should probably specify that you'll need to login to St. Jude Cloud at least once to get access to the app.

Reviewer: For reference, when you try to make an app `PUBLIC` on DNAnexus:

```
***
WARNING: app-mtsg will be made public. Anyone will be able to view and run all
published versions of this app.
***
Confirm making this app public [y/N]: y
Error: You are not authorized to add "PUBLIC" to the authorized users list for app mtsg; if you wish to make an app or a workflow available to all users, then please contact support, code 401.
```

Reviewer 2: I have contacted DNAnexus support.  Their response led me to believe this is going to be a slow process.  In the meantime, I have added instructions on how to login to St. Jude Cloud to get access to the app at the permalink page for the paper:

https://pecan.stjude.cloud/permalink/xenocp

Could somebody from the cloud team make sure the instructions I wrote are correct?  If so, we can update the README to point to that permalink page.  Then, once it's truly public, we can go back and update again.

The easiest way to get XenoCP running locally is using Docker, as `docker build`

> will install all of the dependencies into the container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creates an image with all of the dependencies:
```

	git clone https://github.com/stjude/XenoCP.git
	cd XenoCP
	docker build -t xenocp .
	
	wget -r -np -R "index.html*" -nH --cut-dirs=3 http://ftp.stjude.org/pub/software/xenocp/reference/MGSCv37
	
	# Test run on small dataset
	mkdir results
	docker run \
	  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/sample_data/input_data,target=/data,readonly \
	  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/reference,target=/reference,readonly \
	  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/results,target=/results \
	  xenocp \

> 	  /data/inputs.yml

Reviewer 2: Did you confirm that these directions will work?

Author: Yes, I walked through the example and corrected the instructions as I went.

	
## Introduction to XenoCP

> XenoCP takes a BAM with xenograft reads mapped to the graft genome (e.g. human).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
XenoCP takes a BAM with xenograft reads mapped to the graft genome (e.g., human).
```

> It extracts aligned reads and remaps to the host genome (e.g. mouse) to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It extracts aligned reads and remaps to the host genome (e.g., mouse) to
```

> determine whether the reads are from host or graft.  Output is a copy of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
determine whether the reads are from the host or graft.  The output is a copy of the
```

> original BAM with host reads marked as unmapped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
original BAM with host reads are marked as unmapped.
```

Reviewer 2: Original is better.  If it's unclear, perhaps: "copy of original BAM where contaminating host reads have been marked as unmapped"

[zlib]: https://www.zlib.net/
[sambamba]: http://lomereiter.github.io/sambamba/

> ## Local Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Local usage
```

### Obtain XenoCP 

Clone XenoCP from GitHub: 
```
git clone https://github.com/stjude/XenoCP.git
```

### Build XenoCP

Once the prerequisites are satisfied, build XenoCP using Gradle. 

```
$ gradle installDist
```

> Add the artifacts under `build/install/xenocp/lib` to your Java CLASSPATH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the artifacts under `build/install/xenocp/lib` to your Java `CLASSPATH`.
```

> Add the artifacts under `build/install/xenocp/bin` to your PATH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the artifacts under `build/install/xenocp/bin` to your `PATH`.
```

bam:
  class: File
  path: /data/sample.bam
ref_db_prefix: /reference/ref.fa
```

The following is an example `run` command where files are stored in `test/{data,reference}`. Outputs are saved in `test/results`.

> This example assumes you are running against Mus Musculus (genome build MGSCv37). Set the path to the folder containing your reference data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example assumes you are running against Mus musculus (genome build MGSCv37). Set the path to the folder containing your reference data
```

bam:
  class: File
  path: /data/sample.bam
ref_db_prefix: /reference/ref.fa
```

The following is an example `run` command where files are stored in `test/{data,reference}`. Outputs are saved in `test/results`.

This example assumes you are running against Mus musculus (genome build MGSCv37). Set the path to the folder containing your reference data
and run the following command to produce output from the included sample data. Test output for comparison is located at `sample_data/output_data`.

```
$ mkdir $(pwd)/results
$ docker run \
  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/sample_data/input_data,target=/data,readonly \
  --mount type=bind,source=/path/to/reference,target=/reference,readonly \
  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/results,target=/results \
  xenocp \
  /data/inputs.yml
```

[Dockerfile]: ./Dockerfile

## Evaluate test data results

> If you have [bcftools] and a [GRCh37-lite] reference file, the following will show two variants in the input file. The variant on chromosome 1 is a variant in the host genome. The variant on chromosome 9 is a variant in the graft genome. 

Reviewer 2: Should probably break across lines for source readability.

Also, I'm assuming the variant on chromosome 1 is not really a variant in the host genome, but probably a non-variant in the host genome that appears to be a variant when mapped against the graft genome.  So, perhaps say "The variant on chromosome 1 is an artifact of mouse reads.  The variant on chromosome 9..."

> If you have [bcftools] and a [GRCh37-lite] reference file, the following will show two variants in the input file. The variant on chromosome 1 is a variant in the host genome. The variant on chromosome 9 is a variant in the graft genome. 

Author: ```suggestion
If you have [bcftools] and a [GRCh37-lite] reference file, the following will show two variants in the input file. 
The variant on chromosome 1 is an artifact of mouse reads. The variant on chromosome 9 is a variant in the graft genome. 
```

$ mkdir $(pwd)/results
$ docker run \
  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/sample_data/input_data,target=/data,readonly \
  --mount type=bind,source=/path/to/reference,target=/reference,readonly \
  --mount type=bind,source=$(pwd)/results,target=/results \
  xenocp \
  /data/inputs.yml
```

[Dockerfile]: ./Dockerfile

## Evaluate test data results

If you have [bcftools] and a [GRCh37-lite] reference file, the following will show two variants in the input file. The variant on chromosome 1 is a variant in the host genome. The variant on chromosome 9 is a variant in the graft genome. 

```

> $ bcftools mpileup  -R sample_data/output_data/regions.bed -f ref/GRCh37-lite/GRCh37-lite.fa sample_data/input_data/SJRB001_X.subset.bam | bcftools call -m - | tail -n 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ bcftools mpileup -R sample_data/output_data/regions.bed -f ref/GRCh37-lite/GRCh37-lite.fa sample_data/input_data/SJRB001_X.subset.bam | bcftools call -m - | tail -n 3
```

```

Output: 
```
[mpileup] 1 samples in 1 input files
#CHROM	POS	ID	REF	ALT	QUAL	FILTER	INFO	FORMAT	H_LC-SJRB001-X-SJ39.3-8L
1	156044156	.	C	T	67	.	DP=49;VDB=0.525878;SGB=-0.670168;RPB=0.999118;MQB=0.00218214;MQSB=0.948436;BQB=0.743365;MQ0F=0;ICB=1;HOB=0.5;AC=1;AN=2;DP4=15,19,2,8;MQ=52	GT:PL	0/1:102,0,255
9	19451994	.	G	A	182	.	DP=26;VDB=0.130558;SGB=-0.680642;RPB=0.887078;MQB=0.948139;MQSB=0.955682;BQB=0.053431;MQ0F=0;ICB=1;HOB=0.5;AC=1;AN=2;DP4=5,8,6,6;MQ=58	GT:PL	0/1:215,0,255
```

> After running XenoCP, the host genome variant should be removed as the supporting reads will be unmapped. The following command demonstrates the removal of the variant on chromosome 1 in the output of the sample data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running XenoCP, the host genome variant is removed, as the supporting reads will be unmapped. The following command demonstrates the removal of the variant on chromosome 1 in the output of the sample data.
```

```

> $ bcftools mpileup  -R sample_data/output_data/regions.bed -f ref/GRCh37-lite/GRCh37-lite.fa sample_data/output_data/SJRB001_X.subset.xenocp.bam | bcftools call -m - | tail -n 3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ bcftools mpileup -R sample_data/output_data/regions.bed -f ref/GRCh37-lite/GRCh37-lite.fa sample_data/output_data/SJRB001_X.subset.xenocp.bam | bcftools call -m - | tail -n 3
```

9	19451994	.	G	A	191	.	DP=27;VDB=0.198993;SGB=-0.683931;RPB=0.729125;MQB=0.945959;MQSB=0.960078;BQB=0.0425475;MQ0F=0;ICB=1;HOB=0.5;AC=1;AN=2;DP4=5,8,6,7;MQ=58	GT:PL	0/1:224,0,255
```

[bcftools]: https://samtools.github.io/bcftools/bcftools.html
[GRCh37-lite]: ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/genomes/archive/old_genbank/Eukaryotes/vertebrates_mammals/Homo_sapiens/GRCh37/special_requests/GRCh37-lite.fa.gz

## St. Jude Cloud

To run XenoCP in St. Jude Cloud, please follow the directions at https://www.stjude.cloud/docs/guides/tools/xenocp/

## Availability

Copyright 2019 St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

## Seeking help

> For questions and bug reports, please open an issue on the GitHub project page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For questions and bug reports, please open an issue on the [GitHub] project page.
```
